
Central serotonin drives social behaviours of laboratory mice in a naturalistic environment
Marion Rivalan, Lucille Alonso, Valentina Mosienko, Patrik Bey, Alexia Hyde, Michael Bader, York Winter*, Natasha Alenina*
*shared authorship

Aggression is an adaptive social behavior crucial for the stability and prosperity of social groups, but when uncontrolled, it can lead to pathological violence that disrupts group structure and individual well-being. The comorbidity of uncontrolled aggression across different psychopathologies makes it a potential endophenotype of mental disorders with the same neurobiological substrates. Serotonin plays a critical role in the regulation of impulsive and aggressive behaviors, and Tph2-deficient mice are a potential model of pathological aggression. Home cage monitoring allows for the continuous observation and quantification of social and non-social behaviors in group-housed, freely-moving mice. This study aimed to use an ethological approach to characterize the impact of a complete lack of central serotonin in the everyday expression of social and non-social behaviors and their correlations in undisturbed, group-living Tph2-deficient and wildtype mice. By training a machine learning algorithm on the high throughput dataset, key variables were identified that dissociated one genotype from the other when living in such an ethologically-relevant environment. The specific profile of the Tph2-deficient mice influenced the group's structure and the dynamic of its hierarchical organization, which was evaluated using SNA and the Glicko rating methods, respectively. This study demonstrates the importance of the ethological approach in understanding the impact of pathological aggression on both the individual and the group. Home cage monitoring allows for the observation of the natural behaviors of the mice in a semi-natural habitat and provides a more accurate representation of real-world phenomena and pathological mechanisms. The results of this study provides insights into the neurobiological substrates of aggression and their potential role in complex brain disorders, with implications for diagnosis, prevention, and treatment of psychiatric disorders.
